Adding blog post "keeping a clean git history" (#271)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history.md

cherrypicking, and have the ability to clean up a branch before submitting it to
a Pull Request (PR).

The most egregious thing that holds back people's understanding of Git is the
concept that "if you don't use git on the command line then you're not a real
developer" and this idea it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in the
tech community where we have a gatekeeper problem, but this particular idea of
"you're not a real developer if you don't do X" is the most pervasive and
destructive. The fact that we funnel so many junior and intermediate developers
into using git on the command line, I believe, has significantly hampered their
ability to truly master Git.

This is why, whenever I get the chance, I always recommend people to just
download [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I have always been a visual learner so
when I think about Git I very much **see** the branching model in my head. Even
if you don't know exactly what you're looking at when you see the Fork
interface, you will pick up the concepts of branching in Git much faster when
you see a command's effect on the tree visualisation rather than an abstract set
of characters in the command line.

> ![Screenshot of Fork with a number of branches](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/fork-screenshot.png)

Reviewer: Can you add desktop and mobile versions? See e.g. this post for reference how that works: https://github.com/simplabs/simplabs.github.io/blob/master/_posts/2021-03-12-Ember.js-in-2021---a-beacon-of-productivity.md

Author: eh... so if I were to add mobile versions at 600px wide then there isn't enough detail in the screenshots to be able to see what's going on 🙈  it means that people need to zoom in on their phones to be able to see the detail currently, but at least it's possible to see

I can do some general optimisations other than implementing mobile versions if that helps?

Author: I shaved an average of 200kb off most files (and 1MB off some that were retina screenshots 🙈 ) so it should be much better than before. Let me know if you're ok with this 👍

Reviewer: On mobile these photos will appear much smaller anyway, this is only about not sending over unnecessary pixels.

Author: So I don't think I communicated what I meant effectively. It's not as simple as just "sending over unnecessary pixels" because if we do the trick that you're talking about the user will not be able to zoom in to see the detail on the images. 

I have put together a demo of both scenarios so you can see the difference: 

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/594890/119125331-90298e00-ba29-11eb-83b9-38ea515e09c0.mp4

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/594890/119125371-9b7cb980-ba29-11eb-915b-e0c07212e7b8.mp4

Reviewer: Ok, fine. I'd recommend using entirely different images for mobile in that case though (e.g. leave out a bit of Fork's UI on the left and right). I'll resolve and don't want to block this but as I said regarding the videos before it'd be sad if you lost readers because they wouldn't bother watching a video with audio or zooming an image.

Git up to a point where we're happy to use it day-to-day and then stick to the
few commands that we are comfortable without trying anything too fancy. Most of
the time this works out, but then every so often we do something wrong or
someone asks us to rebase or "squash" something and we either panic and/or mess
up our git repo 😫 This is such a common feeling that sites like
[Oh shit, git!](https://ohshitgit.com/) have cropped up to help us _get out of
our messes_.

It's my belief that a number of factors have held developers back from becoming
super productive with Git, and with a bit of guidance in pairing sessions I can
usually help people to unlock their full potential while using Git. This
potential I am talking about is not anything so complex as dealing with the
reflog, or knowing anything about blobs or the internals of Git, I am just
talking about people feeling comfortable understanding branches, rebasing,
cherrypicking, and have the ability to clean up a branch before submitting it to
a Pull Request or Merge Request.

The most egregious thing that holds back people's understand of Git is the
concept that "if you don't use git on the command line then you're not a real

> developer". This idea and it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in

Author: Yea, I wanted to keep it as a new sentence to emphasise the point but really it is part of the old one. I have fixed that now locally 👍

the tech community where we have a gatekeeper problem but this particular idea
of "you're not a real developer if you don't to X" is the most pervasive and
destructive. The fact that we funnel so many junior and intermediate developers
into using git on the command line, I believe, has significantly hampered their
ability to truly master Git.

This is why, whenever I get the chance, I always recommend people to just
download [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I have always been a visual learner so
when I think about Git I very much **see** the branching model in my head. Even
if you don't know exactly what you're looking at when you see the Fork
interface, you will pick up the concepts of branching in Git much faster when

> you see a command's affect on the tree visualisation rather than an abstract set

Author: yep! funny thing is that I had it the right way and changed it because I thought it was wrong 🙈

future.

To bridge that abstract/conceptual gap, let's look at a concrete example that
illustrates the point that I'm trying to make with this blog. Let's Assume you
now have a good "small" PR. I am calling this "small" because it might have a
lot of lines changed, but it is only a small **conceptual** change as I
described in the last section. This PR of yours may be small from a conceptual
perspective, but it may have taken you quite a few commits to complete it. Here
is an example PR that I know has too many commits:
https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19

If you look at the
[list of commits](https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19/commits) you
will see commit messages that look like:

- Testing Percy integration
- Revert "testing percy integration"
- fixing the Percy ignore rules

This is a great example of something that isn't very helpful for people
reviewing, and it also doesn't tell us anything meaningful about the work that
was done. This is essentially showing everyone your **failed experiments** and
is one of the examples of things that are so objectively wrong that we can even
make a rule about it:

> > Rule 1: Don't show anyone your failed experiments in your Git history.

Author: I've changed it to: 

> Don't waste your reviewer's time by showing them all your failed experiments in your Git history.

to keep in line with the idea of looking at the history through the eyes of a reviewer. What do you think?

remote branch all other contributors to this repo in the future would see a
history that looks a little bit more like this:

![Screenshot of a the branch merged using a squash commit](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/actual-history-after-squash.png)

As I mentioned at the beginning of this post, you should always be thinking
about brave explorers that may be digging into the history of your code a year
from now trying to figure out what was done and **why** it was done that way. A
single commit that has a diff with `+4,762 −1,368` changes will be very hard to
understand and will likely slow anyone who is doing serious code archaeology.

These examples all come from a branch that I created for a now deprecated
repository. As it turns out, the branch was so big and the history was so
unhelpful that whoever merged that branch chose to squash and merge so the
history was lost. I was only able to revive the history for these examples using
some extreme git-fu that is far above what a reasonable code archaeologist
should be expected to do when trying to figure out what happened, and which also

> doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

Author: it's an example, and one that actually isn't used nearly as frequently as it probably should be. The majority of this post is intended to be just used for the "manually browsing the history" that we have all done and we have all seen people do when tryign to figure out why something was added, that is the main point of keeping a good history but it's a bit too squishy to use as an example 😔

> doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

Reviewer: > we have all seen people do when tryign to figure out why something was added

I'd really be interested in understanding better when someone would do that. I don't think I usually do that. Do you have any example reasons why you'd be looking at why something was added?

> doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

Reviewer: I'll consider bisect as a topic for my next post.

> doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

Author: @marcoow as soon as I identify a bug I always look at git blame in GitHub or GitLab to see why that particular change was added i.e. what was the context of the PR that introduced the bug.

This allows me to get a fuller understanding of why something was added and why the bug that I'm currently tracking down was overlooked (lack of testing, oversight etc.). I guess it's just a habit of mine and I know that it's super useful for me 🤷

The answer to this problem is to maintain a Git history closest to what the

> **true** history of the work actually is, creating a number of small PRs that

Reviewer 2: `closest to the true essence of the work done,`

> **true** history of the work actually is, creating a number of small PRs that

Author: @geekygrappler I applied this change 👍

make **one releasable change** to the codebase and keeping the number of commits
as low as possible. The question becomes, how can we effectively do that?

> 

Author: so this is setting up the premise of the rest of the post (or at least it's supposed to be). I'm trying to setup a sense that there is a fix and the following sections are intended to tell you the details of that fix.

Regarding the Qonto discussion, this post (and that particular section) well predate the recent descussion 😂 however the discussion prompted me to finish the last paragraph and submit for internal review as it might help in the discource around this topic 😉

> ## Rebasing, fixups, and moderate git-fu - a case study

Reviewer: Would it help to explain what rebasing actually is (cherry-picking)? That might require also explaining a bunch of other things though so not sure it's a good idea 🤔

Author: That is explained in the new-branch-pr.webm video (I think). Let me know if you think that covers it properly or if we need another section. I am worried that we're very long already and adding more sections to explain everything might get a bit rediculous 🙈

Reviewer: Missed the audio as that doesn't work in Safari. It's covered then 👍 However, I'd suggest thinking about whether we can have it in text as well somehow – see my comment above.

Author: I've responded to the comment above so I'm going to resolve this conversation and we can discuss there 👍

seen much more experienced developers than I struggle and make catastrophic
mistakes while using git on the command line. When people see examples of what I
do regularly with git and think I'm some sort of Git wizard, I usually tell them
that I'm just playing the game on easy mode using a visual Git tool like Fork.
If you take anything away from this article let it be to ignore any gatekeepers
in the industry that might tell you "you're not a real developer if you don't
use Git on the command line" and just start using Fork for 90% of the operations
that you do with Git.

Now it's time to get started. The first thing that I like to do when trying to
split a giant PR into multiple smaller PRs is to go through each of the commits
and see very roughly what they are doing. This give you a feeling for what the
overall PR is trying to achieve and it should allow you to locate any smaller
issues that can be fixed right away. To do this I literally just click through
each commit on the branch and browse some of the changes in Fork, starting at
the **bottom** of the branch in Fork because the oldest commit is at the bottom
and the newest is at the top.

<video controls>

>     <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/browsing-commits.webm" type="video/webm">

Author: So this first one is the only one without audio. Do you feel like I need to narate the "browsing the history" one like I have done the others?

>     <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/browsing-commits.webm" type="video/webm">

Reviewer: ah sorry, didn't realize the others had audio – didn't put on my headphones as I assumed they didn't have audio anyway. I think narrating the browsing the history shouldn't be necessary.

show the reviewer your failed experiments**. If our branch didn't have either of
these commits in it then the outcome would exactly the same, so let's remove
them!

<video controls>
    <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/drop-commits.webm" type="video/webm">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

The next thing that I'm going to demonstrate is using the "fixup" command when
in an interactive rebase. This is another useful tool when trying to not show
the reviewer any of your failed experiments. The way I like to think of this
particular technique is that, firstly, all the commits in your PR should be
considered as being _additive_ in that they are adding a feature or a concept to
the codebase (even if you're actually deleting files). Each of the commits
should be building on top of each other to get from the current state of the
repo to the added concept, and you should do that in a straight line and not
zig-zag back on yourself. What this means in practice is that you should
**never** see a commit that "fixes lint" on something that was added in a

> previous commit. So let's **fixup** some of these "fix lint". Commits now.

Reviewer: Just realized the audio isn't working in Safari which is why I missed it. I think it'd be good if we could have a summary of what you say in the videos in text as well maybe – I'd expect people to not necessarily be willing to watch videos and having to enable audio even to get the information in a blog post. Or people might be on their phones, don't have their headphones etc. and might end up skipping over these completely.

> previous commit. So let's **fixup** some of these "fix lint". Commits now.

Author: I added a new section just before the first non-optional video: 

> Note: Instead of trying to write out the full instructions of how to make these
> changes I will demonstrate each of the techniques used in the rest of this post
> in an embeded video. This has the benefit of being able to see the exact steps that
> you need to do in Fork to achieve the intended goal and avoids any chance that I
> missed a step in my description.

Sure there are benefits to making each video truly optional by adding a corresponding description but I feel like that would not be possible at this stage for the following reasons: 

- the post is already too long
- I wrote the post with the intention of including the videos so the style would need to change
- the post is already very late and I don't want to delay any longer
- even if the previous reasons weren't enough and we collectively agreed that it was **necessary** to continue, I don't know that I have the skill/ability to adjust the post so fundamentally 😞  It's been hard enough to get to this point

> previous commit. So let's **fixup** some of these "fix lint". Commits now.

Reviewer: Sure, I'm fine with keeping the videos and not covering all that in the text. I'd just be worried you'll be losing some readers at that paragraph but I respect the reasons for not changing the post like that.

> previous commit. So let's **fixup** some of these "fix lint". Commits now.

Author: Thanks! I appreciate you understanding my reasoning 🙇  I'm going to resolve this thread

<video controls>
    <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/fixup-fix-issues.webm" type="video/webm">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

Looking through some of the other commits I can see there is one that fixes some
lint issues that were actually introduced in multiple different commits. This
makes it a tiny bit more difficult to fixup because we can't just apply it to a
single commit in our existing history. The way around this is to split this
single commit into multiple commits using the "edit" command during an
interactive rebase:

<video controls>
    <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/split-commits.webm" type="video/webm">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

Once the commit has been split we can then use fixup again exactly as we did in
the previous example.

Now that we have the skills needed to cleanup all the "fix" commits, I'm going

> to go ahead and apply these techniques to the rest of the branch branch. Just to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to go ahead and apply these techniques to the rest of the branch. Just to
```

be clear, I'm not going to use any techniques other than what I have explained
so far in this post.

After about 20 minutes of investigating and rebasing I have ended up with a new
history that is a significant improvement from what we had before

![Screenshot of an improved history in Fork](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/improved-history.png)

This has improved the commit list from 34 commits to 22! But this is still far
too many commits for a single reviewer to be expected to look at all at once.
The problem that we currently face is that there are multiple "features" or
"logical changes" happening in this branch, and if we were to convert this
branch into a PR then we would be breaking on of my only rules: a PR should only
be making one single logical change.

So let's start pulling out some logical Pull requests! I'll start with a super
simple one to demonstrate using interactive rebase or cherry pick to pull out a

> single commit.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to mention the approach of "first make the change easy, then make the change", i.e. 1 to n "preparational" PRs followed by the "real" PR that actually makes the change?

Author: I think that is probably a good thing that can be focused on in the Git workshop 🤔 I wanted to focus on the mecanics of Git and a few Git based rules in this post rather than the content of the PRs themselves. does that make sense?

Reviewer 2: I think it might be worth introducing this concept. It's a very useful one I got from Tobi.

> Often when submitting a PR that adds a feature, there is preparation work, for example refactoring some code, which is important for the feature change, but works as a stand alone PR. In these cases, the refactoring work should be a separate PR to reduce cognitive load on your reviewer. This way in the refactoring PR they will be exclusively code that's goal is to refactor, and in the feature PR will be exclusively code  that introduces the feature. The alternative is to ask your review to cognitively switch in the review between whether a code change is related to the refactoring or to the feature.

Reviewer: I think it helps understanding **why** these Git concepts are even relevant.

---
title: 'Git Good - The magic of keeping a clean Git history'
author: 'Chris Manson'
github: mansona
twitter: real_ate
topic: misc
bio: 'Senior Software Engineer, Ember Learning Core Team member'
description: 'TODO'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021-03-17-built-to-last-6-khalid-maliki/og-image.png
---

This post is designed to help you form a solid mental model while working with
Git both professionally and in an open source project, and how to ensure you are
following best practices to make the process easier for everyone.

<style>
  video:not([data-header-background]) {
    height: inherit !important;
    margin: 2rem calc(-1 * var(--negative-offset));
    padding: 3rem;
  }
</style>

<!--break-->

This topic was inspired by some of my pairing sessions with my colleague
[Tobias Bieniek](https://twitter.com/tobiasbieniek) and the concepts laid out in
this post have become invaluable to me while working with open source
development. If you haven't already checked out
[Tobias' blog on Open Source maintenance](/blog/2018/11/27/open-source-maintenance/)
I would highly recommend checking it out after reading this post 🎉

## Git complexities

> Git can sometimes be complex to get your head around. For most of us we learn

Author: I actually rephrased this to remove the need of the comma 👍

Git up to a point where we're happy to use it day-to-day and then stick to the
few commands that we are comfortable with without trying anything too fancy. Most of
the time this works out, but then every so often we do something wrong or
someone asks us to rebase or "squash" something and we either panic and/or mess
up our git repo 😫 This is such a common feeling that sites like
[Oh shit, git!](https://ohshitgit.com/) have cropped up to help us _get out of
our messes_.

It's my belief that a number of factors have held developers back from becoming
super productive with Git, and with a bit of guidance in pairing sessions I can
usually help people to unlock their full potential while using Git. This
potential I am talking about is not anything so complex as dealing with the
reflog, or knowing anything about blobs or the internals of Git, I am just
talking about people feeling comfortable understanding branches, rebasing,
cherrypicking, and have the ability to clean up a branch before submitting it to

> a Pull Request.

Author: I'm probably not going to do that... The thing is that if you don't know what a Pull Request is this post isn't for you. If i were going to add prerequsites I would include that in a section near the begining when I'm trying to spell out the point of the post and who it's for.

The question is: do you think we should have such a section?

> a Pull Request.

Author: I started responding to this saying "I chose to not use PR all that much and opted to write out Pull Request" but then I actually looked at the post... 32 instances 😳 so yea, good suggestion 😂

> a Pull Request.

Author: I'm leaving the capitalisation though 😉

> a Pull Request or Merge Request.

Author: yea makes sense 👍

The most egregious thing that holds back people's understand of Git is the
concept that "if you don't use git on the command line then you're not a real

> developer" and this idea and it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in

Author: Alas I had it this way before and it has been changed as a result of a previous review https://github.com/simplabs/simplabs.github.io/pull/271#discussion_r629880756 🙃  I think I'm going to leave it as-is even though I prefer it as its own sentence 👍

> developer" and this idea and it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in

Author: Well... https://github.com/simplabs/simplabs.github.io/pull/271#discussion_r629880756 😂 I originally had it as a different sentance but that didn't pass muster. Do you have a suggestion that would help us here?

> developer" and this idea and it needs to die. Sure there are plenty of places in

Author: lol whoops! I missed the extra and 🙈

the tech community where we have a gatekeeper problem but this particular idea

> of "you're not a real developer if you don't to X" is the most pervasive and

Author: omg I applied your suggestion locally and I still couldn't see what had changed 🙈 I think I need to go to the optician

destructive. The fact that we funnel so many junior and intermediate developers
into using git on the command line, I believe, has significantly hampered their
ability to truly master Git.

This is why, whenever I get the chance, I always recommend people to just
download [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I have always been a visual learner so
when I think about Git I very much **see** the branching model in my head. Even
if you don't know exactly what you're looking at when you see the Fork
interface, you will pick up the concepts of branching in Git much faster when
you see a command's effect on the tree visualisation rather than an abstract set
of characters in the command line.

![Screenshot of Fork with a number of branches](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/fork-screenshot.png)

## It's all in the eye of the reviewer

So what is the point of mastering Git and becoming a rebasing wizard with the

> ability to rewrite history like you are Hermione Granger wielding a time turner‽

Author: So what's the point ... ? mixed subtly with "WHAT'S THE POINT!!??!??!?" 😂

> ability to rewrite history like you are Hermione Granger wielding a time turner‽

Author: the point of this was to be a bit comical and interrobangs are just silly anyway

> ability to rewrite history like you are Hermione Granger wielding a time turner‽

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I was expecting "So what's the point of X if I can't Y"

The point of this post is not to get everyone rebasing their branches for the

> sake of feeling cool, but instead I hope that more people learn **just enough**

Author: is this a serious suggestion? 😂

Git skills to achieve one simple goal: make your pull requests more focused and

> understandable to improve their chance of getting merged quickly (or even

Author: I think that would be a bit overkill on the commas 🤔

getting merged at all).

Making sure your pull requests have a good Git history can really streamline the
review process for your colleagues or maintainers of Open Source projects, but
also has the added benefit of keeping the Git history clean in the long run.
This will help your colleagues, or even your future self, understand the thought
process behind your PR if you ever need to go back and do some code archeology
to figure out why something was added or changed in the codebase.

In most open source projects there is a tendency to receive a large number of
PRs out of the blue, some of them are awesome but sometimes you get the dreaded
"rewrite all your code" PR. These are often very hard to ever get merged (if you
would even want to merge them) because they end up touching too much stuff in
the same PR and can make it next to impossible to review properly.

> I like to say to people interested in getting involved in OSS "the smaller the

Author: Yes you can 😂 but the question is: should you! I think it makes that section a bit busy when I tried it and the post is already interrupted enough with various images etc. I'm going to leave this one 👍

PR the more likely it will be to get merged". This doesn't just apply to
external contributors, when I'm working on any Open Source project that I manage
I try to take this into account and split any large rewrite or substantial

> change into a series of smaller iterations.

Author: I took all your suggestions apart from the `!` 😉 I just used a full-stop 👍

It is also important to note that when I refer to a "change" I'm not referring
to the classic Git reporting of _number of lines changed_. We are not computers

> and we don't really care how many bits were flipped in a Pull Request, what we

Author: Yep good point 👍

> and we don't really care how many bits were flipped in a Pull Request, what we

Reviewer 2: Hmmm I think it's fine. Keep as is.

> really care about is the number of **concepts** that changed in a particular PR.

Author: 👍

I have discussed this a bit with my colleagues and the best example I can come
up with is that I don't mind a PR that fixes 1000 instances of a linting rule
**as long as it's the same conceptual change in all lines that are change**, but
if you changed 10 instances of one rule and 1 instance of another rule I feel

> like the cognitive load of reviewing that PR becomes too much.

Author: Nice suggestion 👍

While this post inspired by my work in open source, I have also recently given a
[Git Workshop](https://simplabs.com/resources/workshop/effective-git) for a
client where we communicated the exact same concepts: "the smaller the PR the
more likely it will be to get merged quickly". And if you or your employer cares
about efficiency then this can only be a good thing 😉

## Smallest number of commits for the smallest conceptual change

> So far I have been writing in terms of abstract ideas, this may be useful to a

Author: 👍

few people but I think most people would find it a bit difficult to convert what
I have said so far into meaningful strategies to improve their Pull Requests in
future.

To bridge that abstract/conceptual gap, let's look at a concrete example that

> illustrates the point that I'm trying to make with this blog. Let's assume you

Author: 👍

> illustrates the point that I'm trying to make with this blog. Let's Assume you

Author: 👍

now have a good "small" PR. I am calling this "small" because it might have a

> lot of lines changed, but it is only a small **conceptual** change as I

Author: 👍

the last section. This PR of yours may be small from a conceptual perspective,
but it may have taken you quite a few commits to complete it. Here is an example
PR that I know has too many commits:
https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19

If you look at the
[list of commits](https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-app/pull/19/commits) you
will see commit messages that look like:

- Testing Percy integration
- Revert "testing percy integration"
- fixing the Percy ignore rules

This is a great example of something that isn't very helpful for people
reviewing, and it also doesn't tell us anything meaningful about the work that
was done. This is essentially showing everyone your **failed experiments** and

> is one of the examples of things that are so objectively wrong that we can even

Author: hmm... I guess your suggestion makes the sentance work better... but I'm looking to write `objectively wrong` here. I would even emphasise it but I think the phrase itself is emphasis enough

> is one of the examples of things that are so objectively wrong that we can even

Author: I only saw that there were 3 suggestions on the same theme after writing my last comment 😂 While I do want to have `objectively wrong` in there for this, I take your point on it being judgemental. I'm going to go with unhelpful because it works best in the context 👍

make a rule about it:

> Rule 1: Don't waste your reviewer's time by showing them all your failed
> experiments in your Git history.

Some people might see commits like this and use this as a justification to
recommend squashing commits when merging this PR. I happen to disagree with this
sentiment because I believe this wipes out all the history of what happened in
this PR. Git history is fundamentally useful, as long as it is clean.

In case anyone doesn't know exactly what I mean by "squashing commits when

> merging this PR" let me know you the Git history when you do do a squash-merge

Author: wow! how did I not see that one 😳

You might think that there isn't much of a difference between these screenshots,
and from a "code on disk" perspective you would be right. The same code will be
in the `master` branch at the end of both of these operations, but as you can
see the history is very different. You are only able to see the previous commits
in this example because they are still on the remote `origin/feature/deploy`
branch and I have a local copy of that branch on my computer. If you delete that
remote branch all other contributors to this repo in the future would see a
history that looks a little bit more like this:

![Screenshot of a the branch merged using a squash commit](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/actual-history-after-squash.png)

As I mentioned at the beginning of this post, you should always be thinking
about brave explorers that may be digging into the history of your code a year
from now trying to figure out what was done and **why** it was done that way. A
single commit that has a diff with `+4,762 −1,368` changes will be very hard to

> understand and will likely slow anyone who is doing serious code archaeology.

Author: I think the definition is implied by the start of this paragraph. I even use "digging" in my terminology 😂

> understand and will likely slow anyone who is doing serious code archaeology.

Author: 👍

These examples all come from a branch that I created for a now deprecated
repository. As it turns out, the branch was so big and the history was so

> unhelpful that whoever merged that branch chose to squash and merge so the

Author: I think if you add "so that the history was lost" then you're changing the object of the sentence 🤔 e.g. I made sure to do X so that Y would happen. Rather than I X, so Y happened

I dont know if I'm explaining this correctly 🙈 but I don't think I'm going to make this change because it would change the meaning of the sentence

history was lost. I was only able to revive the history for these examples using

> some extreme git-fu that is far above what a reasonable code archaeologist

Author: isn't this a thing? git-fu is like kung-fu, takes years of practice to become a master and people are amazed when you can do awesome tricks 😂 it's a bit of a joke and a throwaway comment, do you think it needs to be replaced?

> some extreme git-fu that is far above what a reasonable code archaeologist

Reviewer 3: I think it may not be obvious, especially for ESL, and the person might search for a tool called git-fu.

> some extreme git-fu that is far above what a reasonable code archaeologist

Author: I've changed git-fu for `git mastery` now 👍

should be expected to do when trying to figure out what happened, and which also
doesn't work if you're trying to do a git-bisect to find the source of an issue.

The answer to this problem is to maintain a Git history closest to what the
**true** history of the work actually is, creating a number of small PRs that
each make **one releasable change** to the codebase and keeping the number of
commits as low as possible. The question becomes, how can we effectively do
that?

## Rebasing, fixups, and moderate git-fu - a case study

I'm going to spend some time actually fixing the PR that I was using as an
example in the previous section. This way you can see a practical example and
see a good before-and-after shot to compare the difference. I will also go into

> some detail about each technique that I will use to actually preform the changes

Reviewer 2: perform

Author: 👍

in question.

Some of the techniques that I will be using are rebase, interactive rebase,

> fixup, cherrypicking, and commit splitting to name a few. Reading this list you

Reviewer 2: hmmm I would drop `to name a few` as you've named 5, and if there are any more I would name them all (and that seems like a lot of concepts to cover!) or name only 3 and say `to name a few`.

Author: yea I didn't feel comfortable having it there. I made sure to be very explicit about the things I included in this post so there isn't actually anything other than the listed techniques. I removed it 👍

might feel like this article is targeted at the advanced Git user, but I would
say that this is not the case. With a tiny bit of guidance I believe every
developer can start making use of these powerful intermediate git tools and
improve their workflows.

First things first, if you want to follow along with my examples you will need

> to install the Git client called [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I now use Fork

Author: lol yea, so sorry about that 😔 I considered suggesting something else for Linux but I figure that people who are using Linux should be about to find something similar no? 

Do you think that the post would benefit from adding a suggestion for Linux?

> to install the Git client called [Fork](https://git-fork.com/). I now use Fork

Reviewer 4: I tend to agree that the post is very focused on Fork, but it's not quite the only tool that supports these things. https://www.git-tower.com/ and https://www.sourcetreeapp.com are alternatives, though they both also don't seem to support Linux. It might be worth mentioning that even the built-in `gitk` and `git-gui` applications can already help you quite a bit in visualizing the repo state, and those even work on Linux.

exclusively when I'm trying to do anything that requires you to have an image of

> the Git history in your mind, this is mainly because it gives you such a great

Author: 👍

that you do with Git.

Now it's time to get started. The first thing that I like to do when trying to
split a giant PR into multiple smaller PRs is to go through each of the commits
and see very roughly what they are doing. This give you a feeling for what the
overall PR is trying to achieve and it should allow you to locate any smaller
issues that can be fixed right away. To do this I literally just click through
each commit on the branch and browse some of the changes in Fork, starting at
the **bottom** of the branch in Fork because the oldest commit is at the bottom
and the newest is at the top.

<video controls>
    <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/browsing-commits.webm" type="video/webm">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

Looking through the commits I have already seen a whole bunch of simple issues
that could be fixed. The most obvious and easiest to fix is the pair of commits
`testing percy integration` and `Revert "testing percy integration"`. This is a
perfect example of the thing I said earlier in this post where you **should not

> show the reviewer your failed experiments**. If our branch didn't have either of
> these commits in it then the outcome would exactly the same, so let's remove
> them!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
show the reviewer your failed experiments**. If our branch didn't have either of
these commits the outcome would be exactly the same, so let's remove
them!
```

Author: 👍

    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

Once the commit has been split we can then use fixup again exactly as we did in
the previous example.

Now that we have the skills needed to cleanup all the "fix" commits, I'm going
to go ahead and apply these techniques to the rest of the branch. Just to
be clear, I'm not going to use any techniques other than what I have explained
so far in this post.

After about 20 minutes of investigating and rebasing I have ended up with a new
history that is a significant improvement from what we had before

![Screenshot of an improved history in Fork](/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/improved-history.png)

This has improved the commit list from 34 commits to 22! But this is still far
too many commits for a single reviewer to be expected to look at all at once.
The problem that we currently face is that there are multiple "features" or
"logical changes" happening in this branch, and if we were to convert this
branch into a PR then we would be breaking on of my only rules: a PR should only

> be making one single logical change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be making a single logical change.
```

Author: 👍

So let's start pulling out some logical Pull requests! I'll start with a super
simple one to demonstrate using interactive rebase or cherry pick to pull out a
single commit.

<video controls>
    <source src="/assets/images/posts/2021-03-31-keeping-a-clean-git-history/new-branch-pr.webm" type="video/webm">
    Sorry, your browser doesn't support this video format.
</video>

As you can see in the video, creating the new branch using interactive rebase or
using cherrypicking results in identical branches. It doesn't matter which
method that you use but I would recommend getting comfortable with each method
as they both can be useful depending on the situation. Once you have this branch

> you can go though your normal process of pushing to GitHub and opening a PR.

Author: 👍
